Hello, I'm Alan Schafer,
the Game Technologies Evangelist
at Apple.
A lot of great games
are using Game Center,
Apple's social gaming network.
And in iOS 5, we're taking multiplayer
gaming a step further with new
support for churn-based games.
So in this video,
I'll walk you through the steps you'll
take to implement a churn-based game
with an emphasis on the UI you'll
present to the player and how your
game will respond to the user's actions
and the actions of the other players.
You'll see how to
manage multiple matches,
how to allow players to take churns,
how to handle players dropping out,
and how to end the match
when the game is over.
So let's get started.
Of course, we're all familiar with the
mechanics of a turn-based game.
There are multiple players and at
any given time during the game,
it's somebody's turn.
That person makes their move or
takes their turn and the turn
passes to the next player and this
is repeated until the game is over.
How it works in Game Center is
that at any particular moment,
it's somebody's turn,
that player makes their
move and in doing so,
they update the game data for
the match they're playing.
They send that data to
Game Center and tell Game Center to
pass the turn to the next player.
The next person then receives a
notification that it's their turn.
They'll take their phone
out of their pocket,
run your app, and the app downloads
the latest game data.
Then that player repeats the process.
They take their turn,
update the game data,
and tell Game Center to pass
the turn to the next player.
That person gets a notification,
downloads the new data, and so on.
Now, a really great feature of
Game Center is the ability to
auto-match players to fill empty seats.
So, when the turn reaches an empty seat,
Game Center can auto-match a new
player who is waiting to join the game.
It's immediately that person's turn.
They make their move and play continues.
You, the developer,
have total control over how the
turn is passed and you'll code this
based on the rules of your game.
So your code just tells
Game Center whose turn it is next
and you can pass the turn forward,
backwards, you can skip players,
you have complete flexibility.
It's up to you.
And finally,
each player can participate in up to 30
instances of your game simultaneously.
Where in some it's their turn,
some it's someone else's turn.
Up on the top of the screen you
see they're starting a new game and
waiting to have players auto-matched.
And on the right side you see
one where the game is over.
So let's recap these capabilities.
Each player can participate in up to
30 simultaneous matches in your game.
And each match can have up to 16 players.
The gameplay is asynchronous and
communication with Game Center uses
either Wi-Fi or the cellular network.
The game data for each match can be up to
64K and I'll discuss various strategies
for handling this later in the talk.
And you, the developer,
determine how the turns are passed.
And finally,
players join the games either by
accepting invites or by auto-matching.
So those are the capabilities
from the Game Center perspective.
But now let's think about how
a turn-based game needs to be
architected because it's different
than a single player arcade style game
or a synchronous multiplayer game.
The first thing to understand is
that your app needs to be able to
manage multiple matches being played
simultaneously by each player up to 30.
And each match is in a different
state with different game data,
different opponents,
and ultimately each will
have a unique outcome.
The second difference
is that in each match,
it's only one player's turn at a time.
The other players can observe,
but they can't play
until it's their turn.
Think about a game of chess.
While it's your turn,
I can look at the board
and plan my next move,
but I can't move any pieces
until it becomes my turn.
So your app has to be coded to
enforce rules like that one.
The third thing to understand is that
turn-based games are asynchronous.
So your app is not always running
for the entire duration of the game.
Instead, the expectation is that the
player will run your app,
choose one of the matches
that they're playing,
and then your app will download the
latest game data from Game Center so
it can know what's happened.
And last is to realize that
because turn-based games are
asynchronous and because you can
have multiple turn-based games,
you can't run them.
So you have to be careful.
If you have multiple matches
running simultaneously,
that your players could be anywhere
in the app when various events occur.
Maybe they're looking at
a match or making a move,
or maybe they're tapping around on the
main menu when someone else makes their
move and it becomes that player's turn.
You need to handle this thoughtfully.
You shouldn't just yank them
out of what they were doing
and switch to that other match.
You need to think about
putting up a notification,
saying what's happening,
or just let them act accordingly.
accordingly.
Okay,
so with that conceptual introduction,
now let's get started and look at the
API for implementing a turn-based game.
So there's four main classes
you'll use for turn-based games.
The first is the GK turn-based match.
This is the main entry point for
the API and essentially the central
nervous system for each match.
Each match is an instance of the
game with a list of participants,
a pointer to the game state,
and the ID of the player
whose turn it is right now.
The way the match works is that the
player selects a match they want to play.
You use the match API to retrieve the
latest game data from Game Center.
The player takes their turn and
this updates the game state.
And then your app passes
the turn to the next player.
This continues until we break out
of this loop when the match ends,
meaning the game is over.
The second class is the
GK turn-based participant.
This is either a person or an
empty slot and there can be up
to 16 participants in a match.
Each participant contains a player ID,
a status, and an outcome.
There's an interesting
detail about the player ID.
It has the player's Game Center ID or
it can be nil if we're waiting
for someone to be auto-matched.
The status will tell you
the state of the player:
invited or matching before we start,
active while the match is running,
and done after the match ends
or if that person drops out.
The outcome is something you
fill in when the game ends to
tell the player how they did.
The third class is the
GK turn-based event handler.
The delegate object you set up
for this class receives all of
the external events for your game.
For example,
when the player receives an invite
or the invite sequence has been
initiated from the Game Center app.
You'll also receive events each
time someone takes their turn
and when the match has ended.
The fourth class is the GK Turn-Based
Matchmaker View Controller.
This is the hub of all the
user activity in your game.
Its main purpose is to manage the
matches the player is participating in.
It lets them pick a match to
play or to quit or to remove
the match from the list.
And it also allows the users to
start a new match either by inviting
friends or by auto matching.
But now let me take you on a tour
through the UI of the view controller.
And then we'll use this to branch
out into different topics that
you'll need to handle in your code.
First, starting with this button at the
top for invites and matchmaking.
This is how the user starts a new
match by inviting their friends
or asking to be auto-matched.
And once they're in the match,
it'll immediately become their
turn and that match will show
up on the list down below.
This next area here shows the matches
where it's this player's turn right now.
We see the profile photo
of their opponent and when
that person took their turn.
And if we tap one of these matches,
it's expected that you'll
dismiss the view controller,
take the player into the game,
and allow them to play their turn.
Scrolling down.
This next part shows the matches where
it's someone else's turn right now.
So we're waiting for Jessica and
Eunice to take their turns and in
this third one we're waiting for
a new player to be auto-matched
against us and take their turn.
And if we tap one of these matches
it's expected that you'll take the
player into the game and download the
latest game state from Game Center but
it's not our turn so you wouldn't
allow the player to make any moves.
They can only observe
or maybe they can quit.
Speaking of quitting a match,
the player can swipe one of the
matches to bring up a button to quit.
In this case,
they're quitting out of turn.
I'll show you how we
handle that a bit later.
And finally, this section at the bottom
showing matches that have
ended and their outcome.
I can swipe these to
remove them from the list,
or if I tap one, again,
I expect the app to
take me into the game,
download the final game
data from Game Center,
and show me the final
state of this match.
For example, the checkmate move.
So, now let's look at the implementation.
And we'll use the view controller
as the jumping off point.
So we need code that will set up the view
controller and then code that handles all
the possible actions the user might take.
There's four of those possible actions.
They can go to the invite
screen and start a new match
or ask to be auto-matched.
They can select one of the matches and
it might be one where it's their turn,
someone else's turn,
or one where the match has ended.
They can remove a match from the list,
one where it's their turn,
someone else's turn,
or one where the match has ended.
And last, they can cancel out to
dismiss the view controller.
So let's start with setting
up the view controller.
First, I actually need to create a match
request in case the user taps the
plus button to create a new match.
So we create a GK match request,
set the minimum and maximum
number of players and any
other attributes for the match.
Next, we create and initialize the view
controller and pass in the match
request that we just created.
Next, we set some options.
For example,
it's possible to create your own
UI to show the list of matches.
But here, we're just saying that we
want to use the built-in UI.
And we set a delegate.
And finally,
we present the view controller
and we're off and running.
Now the view controller is up and
if the user taps any of the matches
the delegate method "turn-based
matchmaker view controller did
find match" will be called.
And as I said earlier,
what's expected is that you'll
dismiss the view controller and
take the player into the game.
Then you'll download the game data
for the match that they selected,
unpack it and show the state
of the match to the player.
If it were a chess game for
example you'd show them the board.
And what to do from there depends
on whether it's this player's
turn now or someone else's.
If it is their turn you'll
let them take their action.
So let's look at how that's implemented.
Here's that delegate method
turn-based matchmaker view
controller did find match.
We're being passed the view controller
and the match they selected,
so we dismiss the view
controller and go into the game.
And start by downloading the
game data for this match.
And then we have a block
where once it's downloaded,
we'll unpack it into our
own internal representation.
We use that to display
the game to the user,
and then if it's this player's turn,
we'll let them take their
action in the match.
And take note of how we find out
whether it's this player's turn.
One of the properties of the
match is the current participant.
That's the participant
whose turn it is right now.
So we compare the player ID of the
current participant with our player ID.
If they're equal, then it's our turn.
Okay, now let me go back for a moment
and talk more about the match data.
The match data contains all of the
game state for a specific match.
This has to contain all of the data
that you need to fully represent the
current state of the game to each player.
It's an NSData object.
You define its contents and you
pack the game state into it before
you upload it to Game Center and
unpack it when you download it.
Game Center stores this data for all
of your matches and it's visible by all
of the participants in those matches.
But note that only the current
participant can modify it,
the player whose turn it is right now.
and it has a limited size 64K.
So you have to be very wise
about how the data is stored.
If you have a lot of different elements,
you will certainly want to tightly
pack them together yourself,
probably into a C struct instead of,
for example,
using an NSDictionary and assuming
that it will be packed up efficiently.
And if 64K isn't enough space,
then another alternative would be to
use the match data to index into data
that you maintain on your own server.
So we've shown the view controller,
let the user create
matches and select a match.
We talked about downloading the
game data and we check to see
whether it's our turn or not.
So next, let me show you how
you can take your turn.
Now every game has its own logic
and implementation for letting
the player take their turn.
If it were chess, for example,
the player moves a piece.
In a card game, they play their hand,
all according to the rules of the game.
The point at which Game Center applies
to this is when it becomes time to
pass the turn to the next player.
And there's a subtle distinction
here between taking your
turn and passing the turn.
In chess, for example,
after you've moved a piece,
it implicitly becomes
your opponent's turn.
But other games might let you take
multiple actions before passing the turn.
In a trivia game, for example,
perhaps you get to keep answering
questions and playing your turn
until you answer incorrectly,
and then the turn
passes to your opponent.
So when it is time to pass the turn,
what you'll do is to update the match
data with the latest game state.
Your code will choose
which player goes next.
There's an optional message that can
be displayed to the other players.
And then you'll call the
Game Center API to pass the turn.
So let's take a look at that.
So here it is.
It was our turn and
we've taken our action.
So we update the state of the
match based on the action we
took and the rules of the game.
Then we choose who goes next.
And I'll come back to this in a moment.
We can set an optional message that
will be shown to the other participants.
And then here is where the work is done.
We tell the match to end our turn
and we pass in who goes next,
the updated match data,
and there's a completion handler.
For when this is finished
to check for errors.
So this uploads the new match
data to Game Center and triggers
a notification to the next
participant that it's now their turn.
But let's go back.
How do we choose who goes next?
Well, it's up to you, the developer,
to code this logic into your app
based on the rules of the game.
Some games only have two players,
so the turn just passes back and forth.
Other games with more players have
different logic for passing the turn.
But the bottom line is,
each match has an array of participants,
and your app tells
Game Center which one's next.
But there's one thing
you have to be aware of,
and it's that a player might quit
the match before the game is over.
And it's important that you do not
pass the turn to a player who has quit.
So let's look at an example of
how you might implement this.
The match has an array of participants,
and I'm starting out just by
getting the index of the player
whose turn it is right now.
My plan is to pass the turn to
whoever is next in the array,
and go back to index zero if
I'm at the last participant.
So that's what I'm doing here.
I get the object at I plus one,
modulo the count of the participants.
However, I need to make sure that this
next player has not quit,
so I check their status.
If it's not done,
it means they're still in the game,
and they go next.
But if it is done,
then I increment the index,
and go to the next person,
and repeat the process.
And I keep iterating until I find
a player who is still in the game.
Or in this case,
if I come back around to myself,
it means that everyone else has quit,
and I need to handle that.
Now, it was my turn,
I've taken my action,
and I've told Game Center to
pass the turn.
So what happens on the other side?
What do the other players see?
Well, the information about me taking
my turn will come to them through
their GK Turn-Based Event Handler.
If they have the app running,
the delegate method
"handleTurnEventForMatch"
will be called on their side.
And note,
it'll actually be called each time
anybody makes a turn in any match
that they're participating in.
So anyways,
somebody took a turn in some match.
It's not necessarily
that person's turn now.
What should they do?
Well, remember,
that player could be anywhere in
the app when all of this happens.
So you probably just want to
inform them that I took my turn.
If they happen to be looking
at the match that I'm in,
then update its UI.
And if it's now become their turn,
then tell them.
So let's take a look at all of this.
So someone in some match
has taken their turn,
so handleTurnEventForMatch is called
and we're past the match object.
What you do next is up to you,
but in this example,
I'm looking to see if it's now my turn.
If it is,
I use the new GK notification banner
feature to display a banner to the
user saying it's your turn along
with an optional match message.
And if the user happened to
be looking at the match that
someone just took a turn in,
I should update its UI.
But notice that I'm not doing
anything here to immediately take
the player into making their turn or
pull them into a particular match.
Because this event could happen any time
and you want to allow the user to just
keep doing what they were doing before.
They can navigate back to the
view controller themselves to take
their turn when they're ready.
So let's recap taking turns.
Some things to remember.
First,
remember that only the current player,
meaning the person whose
turn it is right now,
only that player has the ability
to update the match data and they
update it when they pass the turn.
Everyone else can only retrieve
the current match data.
Likewise, only the person whose turn it
is right now has the ability to
pass the turn to the next player.
Third, when you're passing the turn,
be aware that players might quit
or might be eliminated and so on,
and you need to make sure you don't pass
the turn to someone who has already quit.
And finally,
understand that everybody in the
match will receive turn events
every time anyone takes a turn,
and you should just include
some unobtrusive UI to inform
the player what's happening.
happened.
Next, I mentioned that players
can quit the match anytime.
So let's talk more about
what you do to handle that.
The scenario is that the player
is actively in a match but decides
to resign before the game is over.
They can do this from our view controller
or you might have some other UI in
the game that allows them to quit.
How you handle this depends on whether
they quit while it's their turn or if
they quit while it's someone else's turn.
If they quit while it's their turn,
your code needs to update the
game state and set that player's
outcome and most importantly,
it needs to tell
Game Center who should go next.
Now, if it's not their turn,
it's much easier.
You just tell Game Center that
they've quit and we handle the rest.
So, let's see how this is done.
Let's say it's this player's turn
right now and they've swiped a match
in the view controller and quit.
The view controller delegate method
turn-based matchmaker view controller
player quit for match will be called,
passing the view controller
and the match they've selected.
Next, you'll update the game data
if it's appropriate to do so.
You'll choose who goes next,
just as you normally would.
And then you tell the match,
this participant quit in
turn with outcome quit,
passing the next participant,
the updated match data,
and a block that's called
after this is sent.
And that's it.
Now, this player's quit and the turn
gets passed to the next person.
And one quick side note,
this code is how you handle
the player quitting in turn
from our view controller.
But if you had your own UI to quit,
you would just call this same method,
participant quit in turn with outcome.
Likewise, if the player quits while
it's someone else's turn,
the only thing we need to
do is inform Game Center.
Now, if the player does it
from the view controller,
we handle it internally.
But if you have your own UI for
managing matches and want to allow this,
then you just tell the match
participant quit out of turn with
outcome quit and give a completion
handler block for when it's finished.
All right,
we've discussed the view controller,
selecting a match, taking turns,
receiving turn events, and resigning.
And the next topic is how we end
the match when the game is over.
So this is about when
a match ends naturally.
The game is over because
of the rules of the game.
In chess, for example, it's checkmate.
So when a match ends,
we need to set an outcome
for all the participants.
And I've listed them here.
That the player won, lost, tied,
or came in first place, second, third,
fourth, and so on.
Or if these outcomes aren't
the ones that you need,
then there's 255 custom
outcomes that you can use.
You'll also set an optional
message and then inform
Game Center that the match has ended.
A notification will then be sent
to all the other participants
and the game will be over.
Note, only the player whose turn it
is right now can end the match.
So here's an example.
I start out by setting the
outcome for each participant.
In this case, everybody's tied.
I update the match data with
the final state of the game and
then set a message that will be
shown to all the other players.
And then finally,
here's where I inform Game Center.
I tell the match and match in turn
with match data and pass the final game
state and a completion handler block.
And that's it.
The game is now over.
On the other side,
what the other players receive
is a notification that gets
handled by their event handler.
So on their side,
the delegate method handle match
ended gets called and they're
past the match that's just ended.
And just like receiving a turn event,
what you'll do is very game dependent.
In this case,
I'm just displaying a banner to
inform the user the match has ended.
And if the user happened to be
looking at the match when it ended,
I'll download the final match data
and update the UI to show the outcome.
That's almost everything.
Just two loose ends I want to
mention before we're finished.
The first is about handling being
launched from the Game Center app itself.
So within the Game Center app,
the user can go look at
one of their friends,
look at the games they have
in common with that friend,
and if it's a turn-based game,
they can start the invite
sequence and then press play.
This launches your app to
actually send the invite.
Now that's handled by the
GK turn-based event handler.
There's a delegate method handle invite
from Game Center that gets called
and it's passed an array of players.
And what you're expected to do is
to create a match request with the
players to invite property set to
this array that was passed to you.
And then present the view controller
so the user can send the invite.
Now this is something many
applications overlook,
but it's important to
implement and handle correctly.
The other loose end is about
customizing the view controller.
You're able to replace our default
match list with your own UI.
And the GK turn-based
match has a class method,
load matches with completion handler.
And that will give you an array
containing all the matches.
And you can step through
these and display their data
in your own custom interface.
Now, if you do that,
then you need to decide how you're
going to handle invites and matchmaking.
Because invites can only be
sent from our built-in UI.
So if you want to support invites,
you'll use the built-in UI,
but tell it not to show the match list.
You'll handle that yourself.
If you don't want to support invites
and just want to do auto-matching,
you can do that programmatically
using find match for request
with completion handler.
All right, so I've covered a lot,
all wrapped up in those four classes.
The view controller handles invites
and matchmaking and lets a user select
a match to play or quit from a match.
The turn-based match is the main
class managing the state of the match,
letting players take
turns and end the game.
Each player is represented
by a turn-based participant,
which you'll watch for status changes.
And external events arrive through
the turn-based event handler.
So if you have questions
about Game Center or the
content I've presented here,
please contact me at
ashaffe at apple.com.
We also have some great documentation
available in the iOS Dev Center,
and you can find me in the
developer forums as well.
Thanks for watching.